Add cross-dag dependencies guide (#213)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/cross-dag-dependencies.md

---
title: "Cross-DAG Dependencies"
description: "How to implement dependencies between your Airflow DAGs."
date: 2021-06-07T00:00:00.000Z
slug: "cross-dag-dependencies"
tags: ["DAGs", "Subdags"]
---

## Overview

When designing Airflow DAGs, it is often recommended to put all related tasks in the same DAG. However, sometimes this is not practical, and it is necessary to create dependencies between DAGs. According to the Airflow documentation on [cross-DAG dependencies](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/operator/external_task_sensor.html#cross-dag-dependencies), this can be useful when:

- Two DAGs are dependent but have different schedules
- Different teams are responsible for the DAGs but there are cross-DAG dependencies

> - A task depends on a task in another DAG, but for a different execution date

Author: I think it's worded poorly in the Apache doc - they're trying to say that even though the two tasks might be in the same DAG, one task depends on the other for a different execution date, which can't be accomplished in the same DAG Run. So essentially you would have a DAG that has a dependency with itself. That seemed unnecessarily confusing to me, so I simplified a bit here.

> Note: All code in this guide can be found in [this Github repo](https://github.com/astronomer/cross-dag-dependencies-tutorial).

## Cross-DAG Dependencies

There are multiple ways to implement cross-DAG dependencies in Airflow, including the `TriggerDagRunOperator`, `ExternalTaskSensor`, and the Airflow API. Which you use depends on how your DAG dependencies are configured, and what your Airflow setup looks like. In this section, we detail how to use each method and ideal scenarios for each, as well as how to view dependencies in the Airflow UI.

Note: it can be tempting to use SubDAGs to handle DAG dependencies, but we highly recommend against doing so as SubDAGs can create performance issues. Instead, use one of the other methods described below.

### TriggerDagRunOperator

The `TriggerDagRunOperator` is an easy way to implement cross-DAG dependencies. This operator allows you to have a task in one DAG that triggers another DAG in the same Airflow environment. The Astronomer Registry has more documentation for this operator [here](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/triggerdagrunoperator).

> The `TriggerDagRunOperator` is ideal in situations where you have one parent DAG, that needs to trigger one or more downstream child DAGs, or if you have dependent DAGs that have both upstream and downstream tasks in the parent DAG. Because you can use this operator for any task in your DAG, it is highly flexible; it can also often be an ideal replacement for SubDAGs. 

Author: Went through and made the metaphors consistent, and also added some graph view screenshots for the example DAGs. Hopefully it's more clear now.

    """
    Dummy function to call before and after depdendent DAG.
    """
    print(f"The {kwargs['task_type']} task has completed.")

# Default settings applied to all tasks
default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=5)
}

with DAG('trigger-dagrun-dag',
         start_date=datetime(2021, 1, 1),
         max_active_runs=1,
         schedule_interval='@daily',
         default_args=default_args,
         catchup=False
         ) as dag:

    start_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id='starting_task',
        python_callable=print_task_type,
        op_kwargs={'task_type': 'starting'}
    )

    trigger_dependent_dag = TriggerDagRunOperator(
        task_id="trigger_dependent_dag",
        trigger_dag_id="dependent-dag",
        wait_for_completion=True
    )

    end_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id='end_task',
        python_callable=print_task_type,
        op_kwargs={'task_type': 'ending'}
    )

    start_task >> trigger_dependent_dag >> end_task
```

There are a couple of things to note when using this operator:

> - If your dependent DAG requires a config input, or a specific execution date, these can be specified in the operator using the `conf` and `execution_date` params respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your dependent DAG requires a config input or a specific execution date, these can be specified in the operator using the `conf` and `execution_date` params respectively.
```

- If your parent DAG has downstream tasks that require the child DAG to finish first, you should set the `wait_for_completion` param to `True` as shown in the example above. This param defaults to `False`, meaning once the child DAG has started, the parent DAG will mark the task as a success and move on to any downstream tasks.

### ExternalTaskSensor

> The next method for creating cross-DAG dependencies is using the `ExternalTaskSensor`. This method uses a sensor in the child DAG, which will wait until a task is completed in the parent DAG before moving on to other tasks. You can find more info on this sensor [here](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/externaltasksensor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next method for creating cross-DAG dependencies is to add a `ExternalTaskSensor` to your child DAG. The child DAG will wait until a task is completed in the parent DAG before moving on to other tasks. You can find more info on this sensor on the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/externaltasksensor).
```

> This method is not as flexible as the `TriggerDagRunOperator`, since the dependency is implemented in the downstream DAG. It is ideal in situations where you have a DAG that can only run after another task or DAG(s) has completed. An example DAG using the `ExternalTaskSensor` is shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is not as flexible as the `TriggerDagRunOperator`, since the dependency is implemented in the downstream DAG. It is ideal in situations where you have a child DAG that can run only after another task in a parent DAG has completed. An example DAG using the `ExternalTaskSensor` is shown below:
```
Rewriting this based on what I assume is going on here, but not super sure especially since we're no longer using the parent/child language.

---
title: "Cross-DAG Dependencies"
description: "How to implement dependencies between your Airflow DAGs."
date: 2021-06-07T00:00:00.000Z
slug: "cross-dag-dependencies"
tags: ["DAGs", "Subdags"]
---

## Overview

> When designing Airflow DAGs, it is often best practice to put all related tasks in the same DAG. However, it's sometimes necessary to create dependencies between your DAGs. One way of thinking about this is that a node in your DAG is actually a whole other DAG, rather than just a single task. Throughout this guide, we'll use "upstream DAG" to denote the DAG (or partial DAG) that must run before the dependent DAG, and the "downstream DAG" to denote the DAG that depends on the upstream DAG's completion before running. 

Reviewer: Also...! do we need to more explicitly define "dependent DAG"? My impression is that both upstream and downstream DAGs are dependent DAGs, but it seems like it's mentioned only in reference to downstream DAGs.

> When designing Airflow DAGs, it is often best practice to put all related tasks in the same DAG. However, it's sometimes necessary to create dependencies between your DAGs. One way of thinking about this is that a node in your DAG is actually a whole other DAG, rather than just a single task. Throughout this guide, we'll use "upstream DAG" to denote the DAG (or partial DAG) that must run before the dependent DAG, and the "downstream DAG" to denote the DAG that depends on the upstream DAG's completion before running. 

Author: Both the "upstream" and the "downstream" DAG would be considered dependent DAGs (they are dependent on each other). This isn't any different than task dependencies, which are well known to any airflow user, so I don't really think it's necessary to define it explicitly.

![Trigger DAG Graph](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/cross-dag-dependencies/trigger_dag_run_graph.png)

There are a couple of things to note when using this operator:

- If your dependent DAG requires a config input or a specific execution date, these can be specified in the operator using the `conf` and `execution_date` params respectively.
- If your upstream DAG has downstream tasks that require the downstream DAG to finish first, you should set the `wait_for_completion` param to `True` as shown in the example above. This param defaults to `False`, meaning once the downstream DAG has started, the upstream DAG will mark the task as a success and move on to any downstream tasks.

### ExternalTaskSensor

The next method for creating cross-DAG dependencies is to add a `ExternalTaskSensor` to your downstream DAG. The downstream DAG will wait until a task is completed in the upstream DAG before moving on to the rest of the DAG. You can find more info on this sensor on the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/externaltasksensor).

> This method is not as flexible as the `TriggerDagRunOperator`, since the dependency is implemented in the downstream DAG. It is ideal in situations where you have a downstream DAG that can run only after another task in a upstream DAG has completed. An example DAG using the `ExternalTaskSensor` is shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is not as flexible as the `TriggerDagRunOperator`, since the dependency is implemented in the downstream DAG. It is ideal in situations where you have a downstream DAG that can run only after a task in the upstream DAG has completed. An example DAG using the `ExternalTaskSensor` is shown below:
```

The "ideal situation" here seems to be reiterating the definition of the TaskSensor itself, is there anything else we can say about the context here that will give people a sense of whether to use this over the `TriggerDagRunOperator`?

Author: Yep, good call. Changed to an example that wouldn't work with the `TriggerDagRunOperator`.

    """
    Downstream function with print statement.
    """
    print('Upstream DAG has completed. Starting other tasks.')

default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=5)
}

with DAG('external-task-sensor-dag',
         start_date=datetime(2021, 1, 1),
         max_active_runs=3,
         schedule_interval='*/1 * * * *',
         catchup=False
         ) as dag:

    downstream_task1 = ExternalTaskSensor(
        task_id="downstream_task1",
        external_dag_id='example_dag',
        external_task_id='bash_print_date2',
        allowed_states=['success'],
        failed_states=['failed', 'skipped']
    )

    downstream_task2 = PythonOperator(
        task_id='downstream_task2',
        python_callable=downstream_fuction,
        provide_context=True
    )

    downstream_task1 >> downstream_task2
```

In this DAG, `downstream_task1` waits for the `bash_print_date2` task of `example_dag` to complete before moving on to execute the rest of the downstream tasks (`downstream_task2`). The graph view of the DAG looks like this:

> ![External Task Sensor Grapg](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/cross-dag-dependencies/external_task_sensor_graph.png)

Reviewer: Names in this screenshot are inconsistent with the names in the sample DAG.

Author: Good catch, I updated the screenshot.

> If you want the downstream DAG to wait for the entire upstream DAG to finish instead of a specific task, you can set the `external_task_id` to `None`. Note that in this case we specify that the external task must have a state of `success` in order for the downstream task to succeed, as defined by the `allowed_states` and `failed_states`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want the downstream DAG to wait for the entire upstream DAG to finish instead of a specific task, you can set the `external_task_id` to `None`. In this case, we specify that the external task must have a state of `success` for the downstream task to succeed, as defined by the `allowed_states` and `failed_states`. 
```

Also note that in the example above, the upstream DAG (`example_dag`) and downstream DAG (`external-task-sensor-dag`) must have the same start date and schedule interval. This is because the `ExternalTaskSensor` will look for completion of the specified task or DAG at the same `execution_date`. To look for completion of the external task at a different date, you can make use of either of the `execution_delta` or `execution_date_fn` parameters (these are described in more detail in the documentation linked above).

### Airflow API

> The [Airflow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html) is another way of creating cross-DAG dependencies. This is especially useful in [Airflow 2.0](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/introducing-airflow-2-0), which has a full stable REST API. To use the API to trigger a DAG run, you can make a POST request to the `DAGRuns` endpoint as described in the Airflow documentation [here](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/introducing-airflow-2-0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Airflow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html) is another way of creating cross-DAG dependencies. This is especially useful in [Airflow 2.0](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/introducing-airflow-2-0), which has a full stable REST API. To use the API to trigger a DAG run, you can make a POST request to the `DAGRuns` endpoint as described in the [Airflow documentation](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/introducing-airflow-2-0).
```

> This method is useful if your dependent DAGs live in different Airflow environments (more on this below), or if the downstream DAG does not have any downstream dependencies in the upstream DAG (e.g. the downstream DAG is the last task in the upstream DAG). One drawback to this method is that the task triggering the downstream DAG will complete once the API call is complete, rather than when the downstream DAG is complete.

Reviewer: For my own knowledge, why is that last sentence a drawback?

Author: If you have a task A that has a downstream dependency (more tasks that run after it), you generally want to wait until that task A is completed before moving on the downstream tasks. With the API in this example, your task A is an entire DAG, and taks A will be considered complete once the API call is made, not when the DAG that got triggered finishes. So if your "downstream" DAG takes 3 minutes to complete, it will still be running even though task A is done, which may impact other downstream tasks.

> This method is useful if your dependent DAGs live in different Airflow environments (more on this below), or if the downstream DAG does not have any downstream dependencies in the upstream DAG (e.g. the downstream DAG is the last task in the upstream DAG). One drawback to this method is that the task triggering the downstream DAG will complete once the API call is complete, rather than when the downstream DAG is complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is useful if your dependent DAGs live in different Airflow environments (more on this in the Cross-Deployment Dependencies section below), or if the downstream DAG does not have any downstream dependencies in the upstream DAG (e.g. the downstream DAG is the last task in the upstream DAG). One drawback to this method is that the task triggering the downstream DAG will complete once the API call is complete, rather than when the downstream DAG is complete.
```

         max_active_runs=1,
         schedule_interval='@daily',
         catchup=False
         ) as dag:

    start_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id='starting_task',
        python_callable=print_task_type,
        op_kwargs={'task_type': 'starting'}
    )

    api_trigger_dependent_dag = SimpleHttpOperator(
        task_id="api_trigger_dependent_dag",
        http_conn_id='airflow-api',
        endpoint='/api/v1/dags/dependent-dag/dagRuns',
        method='POST',
        headers={'Content-Type': 'application/json'},
        data=json_body
    )

    end_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id='end_task',
        python_callable=print_task_type,
        op_kwargs={'task_type': 'ending'}
    )

    start_task >> api_trigger_dependent_dag >> end_task
```

This DAG has a similar structure to the `TriggerDagRunOperator` DAG above, but instead uses the `SimpleHttpOperator` to trigger the `dependent-dag` using the Airflow API. The graph view looks like this:

![API Graph View](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/cross-dag-dependencies/api_graph.png)

In order to use the `SimpleHttpOperator` to trigger another DAG, you need to define the following:

> - `endpoint`: this should be of the form `'/api/v1/dags/<dag-id>/dagRuns'` where `<dag-id>` is the ID of the DAG you want to trigger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `endpoint`: This should be of the form `'/api/v1/dags/<dag-id>/dagRuns'` where `<dag-id>` is the ID of the DAG you want to trigger.
```

> - `data`: to trigger a DAG Run using this endpoint you must provide an execution date. In the example above, we use the `execution_date` of the upstream DAG, but this can be any date of your choosing. You can also specify other information about the DAG run as described in the API documentation linked above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `data`: To trigger a DAG Run using this endpoint, you must provide an execution date. In the example above, we use the `execution_date` of the upstream DAG, but this can be any date of your choosing. You can also specify other information about the DAG run as described in the API documentation linked above.
```

> - `http_conn_id`: this should be an Airflow connection of type HTTP, with your Airflow domain as the Host, and any authentication provided either as a Login/Password (if using Basic auth), or as a json-formatted Extra. In the example below we use an authorization token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `http_conn_id`: This should be an Airflow connection of type HTTP, with your Airflow domain as the Host. Any authentication should be provided either as a Login/Password (if using Basic auth) or as a JSON-formatted Extra. In the example below, we use an authorization token.
```

![Http Connection](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/cross-dag-dependencies/http_connection.png)

### DAG Dependencies View

In [Airflow 2.1](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/changelog.html#airflow-2-1-0-2021-05-21), a new cross-DAG dependencies view was added to the Airflow UI. This view shows all dependencies between DAGs in your Airflow environment as long as they are implemented using one of the following methods:

- Using a `TriggerDagRunOperator`
- Using an `ExternalTaskSensor`

Dependencies can be viewed in the UI by going to `Browse` → `DAG Dependencies`. The screenshot below shows the dependencies created by the `TriggerDagRunOperator` and `ExternalTaskSensor` example DAGs in the sections above.

![DAG Dependencies View](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/cross-dag-dependencies/dag_dependencies_view.png)

## Cross-Deployment Dependencies

> Sometimes it may be necessary to implement cross-DAG dependencies where the DAGs do not exist in the same Airflow deployment. The `TriggerDagRunOperator` and `ExternalTaskSensor` methods described above are designed to work with DAGs in the same Airflow environment, so are not ideal for cross-Airflow deployments. The Airflow API on the other hand, is perfect for this use case. In this section we'll focus on how to implement this method on the Astronomer platform, but the general concepts will likely be similar wherever your Airflow environments are deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes it may be necessary to implement cross-DAG dependencies where the DAGs do not exist in the same Airflow deployment. The `TriggerDagRunOperator` and `ExternalTaskSensor` methods described above are designed to work with DAGs in the same Airflow environment, so they are not ideal for cross-Airflow deployments. The Airflow API, on the other hand, is perfect for this use case. In this section, we'll focus on how to implement this method on the Astronomer platform, but the general concepts will likely be similar wherever your Airflow environments are deployed.
```

### TriggerDagRunOperator

The `TriggerDagRunOperator` is an easy way to implement cross-DAG dependencies. This operator allows you to have a task in one DAG that triggers another DAG in the same Airflow environment. Read more in-depth documentation about this operator on the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/triggerdagrunoperator).

The `TriggerDagRunOperator` is ideal in situations where you have one upstream DAG that needs to trigger one or more downstream DAGs, or if you have dependent DAGs that have both upstream and downstream tasks in the upstream DAG (i.e. the dependent DAG is in the middle of tasks in the upstream DAG). Because you can use this operator for any task in your DAG, it is highly flexible. It's also an ideal replacement for SubDAGs. 

Below is an example DAG that implements the `TriggerDagRunOperator` to trigger the `dependent-dag` between two other tasks. 

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.operators.python import PythonOperator
from airflow.operators.trigger_dagrun import TriggerDagRunOperator
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

def print_task_type(**kwargs):
    """

>     Dummy function to call before and after depdendent DAG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Dummy function to call before and after dependent DAG.
```

        trigger_dag_id="dependent-dag",
        wait_for_completion=True
    )

    end_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id='end_task',
        python_callable=print_task_type,
        op_kwargs={'task_type': 'ending'}
    )

    start_task >> trigger_dependent_dag >> end_task
```

In the following graph view, you can see that the `trigger_dependent_dag` task in the middle is the `TriggerDagRunOperator`, which runs the `dependent-dag`. 

![Trigger DAG Graph](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/cross-dag-dependencies/trigger_dag_run_graph.png)

There are a couple of things to note when using this operator:

- If your dependent DAG requires a config input or a specific execution date, these can be specified in the operator using the `conf` and `execution_date` params respectively.
- If your upstream DAG has downstream tasks that require the downstream DAG to finish first, you should set the `wait_for_completion` param to `True` as shown in the example above. This param defaults to `False`, meaning once the downstream DAG has started, the upstream DAG will mark the task as a success and move on to any downstream tasks.

### ExternalTaskSensor

> The next method for creating cross-DAG dependencies is to add a `ExternalTaskSensor` to your downstream DAG. The downstream DAG will wait until a task is completed in the upstream DAG before moving on to the rest of the DAG. You can find more info on this sensor on the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/externaltasksensor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next method for creating cross-DAG dependencies is to add an `ExternalTaskSensor` to your downstream DAG. The downstream DAG will wait until a task is completed in the upstream DAG before moving on to the rest of the DAG. You can find more info on this sensor on the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/externaltasksensor).
```
